SOURCE: RBI-MASTER-DIRECTION-NBFC-19-10-2023.
Chapter VII
Fair Practices Code
45. Fair Practices Code
NBFCs having customer interface shall adopt the following guidelines:
For the purpose of this paragraph, the term ‘personal loans’ shall have the same meaning
as defined in the Annex to the circular on ‘XBRL Returns – Harmonization of Banking
Statistics’ dated January 04, 2018.
45.1 Applications for loans and their processing
45.1.1 All communications to the borrower shall be in the vernacular language or a
language as understood by the borrower.
45.1.2 Loan application forms shall include necessary information which affects the
interest of the borrower, so that a meaningful comparison with the terms and conditions
offered by other NBFCs can be made and informed decision can be taken by the
borrower. The loan application form shall indicate the documents required to be submitted
with the application form.
45.1.3 NBFCs shall devise a system of giving acknowledgement for receipt of all loan
applications. Preferably, the time frame within which loan applications will be disposed of
shall also be indicated in the acknowledgement.
45.2 Loan appraisal and terms/ conditions
45.2.1 NBFCs shall convey in writing to the borrower in the vernacular language as
understood by the borrower by means of sanction letter or otherwise, the amount of loan
sanctioned along with the terms and conditions including annualised rate of interest and
method of application thereof and keep the acceptance of these terms and conditions by
the borrower on its record. As complaints received against NBFCs generally pertain to
charging of high interest/penal charges, NBFCs shall mention the penalties charged for
late repayment in bold in the loan agreement.
45.2.2 Borrowers may not be fully aware of the terms and conditions of the loans
including rate of interest at the time of sanction of loans, either because the NBFC does
not provide details of the same or the borrower has no time to look into detailed
agreement. Not furnishing a copy of the loan agreement or enclosures quoted in the loan
agreement is an unfair practice and this could lead to disputes between the NBFC and
the borrower with regard to the terms and conditions. NBFCs, shall furnish a copy of the
loan agreement as understood by the borrower along with a copy each of all enclosures
quoted in the loan agreement to all the borrowers at the time of sanction / disbursement
of loans.
45.3 15Penal charges in loan accounts
45.3.1 Penalty, if charged, for non-compliance of material terms and conditions of loan
contract by the borrower shall be treated as ‘penal charges’ and shall not be levied in the
form of ‘penal interest’ that is added to the rate of interest charged on the advances. There
shall be no capitalisation of penal charges i.e., no further interest computed on such
charges. However, this will not affect the normal procedures for compounding of interest
in the loan account.
45.3.2 NBFCs shall not introduce any additional component to the rate of interest and
ensure compliance to these guidelines in both letter and spirit.
45.3.3 NBFCs shall formulate a Board approved policy on penal charges or similar
charges on loans, by whatever name called.
45.3.4 The quantum of penal charges shall be reasonable and commensurate with the
non-compliance of material terms and conditions of loan contract without being
discriminatory within a particular loan/product category.
45.3.5 The penal charges in case of loans sanctioned to ‘individual borrowers, for
purposes other than business’, shall not be higher than the penal charges to nonindividual borrowers for similar non-compliance of material terms and conditions.
45.3.6 The quantum and reason for penal charges shall be clearly disclosed by NBFCs
to the customers in the loan agreement and most important terms & conditions/Key Fact
Statement (KFS) as, in addition to being displayed on websites of NBFCs under Interest
rates and Service Charges.
45.3.7 Whenever reminders for non-compliance of material terms and conditions of loan
are sent to borrowers, the penal charges shall be communicated. Further, any instance
of levy of penal charges and the reason therefor shall also be communicated45.3.8 The instructions in paragraph 45.3 shall come into effect from January 1, 2024.
NBFCs may carry out appropriate revisions in their policy framework and ensure
implementation of the instructions in respect of all the fresh loans availed/ renewed from
the effective date. In the case of existing loans, the switchover to new penal charges
regime shall be ensured on next review or renewal date or six months from the effective
date of these instructions, whichever is earlier.
45.4 Disbursement of loans including changes in terms and conditions
45.4.1 NBFCs shall give notice to the borrower in the vernacular language or a language
as understood by the borrower of any change in the terms and conditions including
disbursement schedule, interest rates, service charges, prepayment charges etc. NBFCs
shall also ensure that changes in interest rates and charges are affected only
prospectively. A suitable condition in this regard must be incorporated in the loan
agreement.
45.4.2 Decision to recall/accelerate payment or performance under the agreement shall
be in consonance with the loan agreement.
45.4.3 NBFCs shall release all securities on repayment of all dues or on realisation of
the outstanding amount of loan subject to any legitimate right or lien for any other claim
they may have against borrower. If such right of set off is to be exercised, the borrower
shall be given notice about the same with full particulars about the remaining claims and
the conditions under which NBFCs are entitled to retain the securities till the relevant
claim is settled/paid.
45.5 16Responsible Lending Conduct – Release of movable/immovable property
documents on repayment/ settlement of personal loans
It has been observed that the NBFCs follow divergent practices in release of movable/
immovable property documents upon receiving full repayment and closure of loan
account leading to customer grievances and disputes. To address the issues faced by
the borrowers and towards promoting responsible lending conduct among the NBFCs,
the following instructions are issued:
45.5.1 Release of movable/immovable property documents
(i) NBFCs shall release all the original movable / immovable property documents and
remove charges registered with any registry within a period of 30 days after full
repayment/settlement of the loan account.
(ii) The borrower shall be given the option of collecting the original movable/ immovable
property documents either from the banking outlet/branch where the loan account was
serviced or any other office of the NBFC where the documents are available, as per
her/his preference.
(iii) The timeline and place of return of original movable/immovable property documents
shall be mentioned in the loan sanction letters issued on or after the effective date.
(iv) In order to address the contingent event of demise of the sole borrower or joint
borrowers, NBFCs shall have a well laid out procedure for return of original
movable/immovable property documents to the legal heirs. Such procedure shall be
displayed on the website of NBFCs along with other similar policies and procedures for
customer information.
45.5.2 Compensation for delay in release of movable/immovable property documents
(i) In case of delay in releasing of original movable/immovable property documents or
failing to file charge satisfaction form with relevant registry beyond 30 days after full
repayment/ settlement of loan, NBFCs shall communicate to the borrower reasons for
such delay. In case where the delay is attributable to the NBFC, it shall compensate the
borrower at the rate of ₹5,000 for each day of delay.
(ii) In case of loss/damage to original movable/immovable property documents, either in
part or in full, NBFCs shall assist the borrower in obtaining duplicate/certified copies of
the movable/immovable property documents and shall bear the associated costs, in
addition to paying compensation as indicated at clause (ii) above. However, in such
cases, an additional time of 30 days will be available to the NBFCs to complete this
procedure and the delayed period penalty will be calculated thereafter (i.e., after a total
period of 60 days).
(iii) The compensation provided under these directions shall be without prejudice to the
rights of a borrower to get any other compensation as per any applicable law.
45.5.3 Applicability
The instructions in paragraph 45.5 shall be applicable to all cases where release of
original movable/immovable property documents falls due on or after December 01, 2023.
45.6 17Reset of floating interest rate on Equated Monthly Instalments (EMI) based
personal loans
45.6.1 At the time of sanction of EMI based floating rate personal loans, NBFCs are
required to take into account the repayment capacity of borrowers to ensure that
adequate headroom/margin is available for elongation of tenor and/or increase in EMI, in
the scenario of possible increase in the external benchmark rate during the tenor of the
loan. However, in respect of EMI based floating rate personal loans, in the wake of rising
interest rates, several consumer grievances related to elongation of loan tenor and/or
increase in EMI amount, without proper communication with and/or consent of the
borrowers have been received. In order to address these concerns, NBFCs are advised
to put in place an appropriate policy framework meeting the following requirements for
implementation and compliance:
(i) At the time of sanction, NBFCs shall clearly communicate to the borrowers about the
possible impact of change in benchmark interest rate on the loan leading to changes in
EMI and/or tenor or both. Subsequently, any increase in the EMI/ tenor or both on account
of the above shall be communicated to the borrower immediately through appropriate
channels.
(ii) At the time of reset of interest rates, NBFCs shall provide the option to the borrowers
to switch over to a fixed rate as per their Board approved policy. The policy, inter alia,
may also specify the number of times a borrower will be allowed to switch during the tenor
of the loan.
(iii) The borrowers shall also be given the choice to opt for (a) enhancement in EMI or
elongation of tenor or for a combination of both options; and, (b) to prepay, either in part
or in full, at any point during the tenor of the loan. Levy of foreclosure charges/ prepayment penalty shall be subject to extant instructions.
(iv) All applicable charges for switching of loans from floating to fixed rate and any other
service charges/ administrative costs incidental to the exercise of the above options shall 
be transparently disclosed in the sanction letter and also at the time of revision of such
charges/ costs by the NBFCs from time to time.
(v) NBFCs shall ensure that the elongation of tenor in case of floating rate loan does not
result in negative amortisation.
(vi) NBFCs shall share/ make accessible to the borrowers, through appropriate channels,
a statement at the end of each quarter which shall at the minimum, enumerate the
principal and interest recovered till date, EMI amount, number of EMIs left and annualized
rate of interest/Annual Percentage Rate (APR) for the entire tenor of the loan. NBFCs
shall ensure that the statements are simple and easily understood by the borrower.
45.6.2 Apart from the equated monthly instalment loans, these instructions would also
apply, mutatis mutandis, to all equated instalment based loans of different periodicities.
45.6.3 NBFCs shall ensure that the instructions in paragraph 45.6 are extended to the
existing as well as new loans suitably by December 31, 2023. All existing borrowers shall
be sent a communication, through appropriate channels, intimating the options available
to them.
45.7 General
45.7.1 NBFCs shall refrain from interference in the affairs of the borrower except for the
purposes provided in the terms and conditions of the loan agreement (unless information,
not earlier disclosed by the borrower, has been noticed).
45.7.2 In case of receipt of request from the borrower for transfer of borrowal account,
the consent or otherwise i.e., objection of the NBFC, if any, shall be conveyed within 21
days from the date of receipt of request. Such transfer shall be as per transparent
contractual terms in consonance with law.
45.7.3 In the matter of recovery of loans, an NBFC shall not resort to undue harassment
viz., persistently bothering the borrowers at odd hours, use muscle power for recovery of
loans etc. As complaints from customers also include rude behaviour from the staff of the
companies, NBFCs shall ensure that the staff are adequately trained to deal with the
customers in an appropriate manner.
45.7.4 As a measure of customer protection and also in order to bring in uniformity with
regard to prepayment of various loans by borrowers of banks and NBFCs, NBFCs shall
not charge foreclosure charges/ pre-payment penalties on any floating rate term loan 
sanctioned for purposes other than business to individual borrowers, with or without coobligant(s).
45.8 Responsibility of Board of Directors
45.8.1 The Board of Directors of NBFCs shall also lay down the appropriate grievance
redressal mechanism within the organization. Such a mechanism shall ensure that all
disputes arising out of the decisions of lending institution’s functionaries are heard and
disposed of at least at the next higher level.
45.8.2 The Board of Directors shall also provide for periodical review of the compliance
of the Fair Practices Code and the functioning of the grievances redressal mechanism at
various levels of management. A consolidated report of such reviews shall be submitted
to the Board at regular intervals, as may be prescribed by it.
45.9 Reserve Bank – Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021
NBFCs covered under the Reserve Bank – Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 (RBIOS, 2021) shall comply with the directions provided under the said Scheme.
45.10 Language and mode of communicating Fair Practice Code
Fair Practices Code (which shall preferably be in the vernacular language or a language
as understood by the borrower) based on the guidelines outlined hereinabove shall be
put in place by all NBFCs with the approval of their Boards. NBFCs will have the freedom
of drafting the Fair Practices Code, enhancing the scope of the guidelines but in no way
sacrificing the spirit underlying the above guidelines. The same shall be put up on their
website, for the information of various stakeholders.
45.11 Regulation of excessive interest charged by NBFCs
45.11.1 The Board of each NBFC shall adopt an interest rate model taking into account
relevant factors such as cost of funds, margin and risk premium and determine the rate
of interest to be charged for loans and advances. The rate of interest and the approach
for gradations of risk and rationale for charging different rate of interest to different
categories of borrowers shall be disclosed to the borrower or customer in the application
form and communicated explicitly in the sanction letter.
45.11.2 The rates of interest and the approach for gradation of risks shall also be made
available on the website of the companies or published in the relevant newspapers. The 
information published on the website or otherwise published shall be updated whenever
there is a change in the rates of interest.
45.11.3 The rate of interest must be annualised rate so that the borrower is aware of the
exact rates that would be charged to the account.
45.12 Complaints about excessive interest charged by NBFCs
45.12.1 The Reserve Bank has been receiving several complaints regarding levying of
excessive interest and charges on certain loans and advances by NBFC. Though interest
rates are not regulated by the Reserve Bank, rates of interest beyond a certain level may
be seen to be excessive and can neither be sustainable nor be conforming to normal
financial practice.
45.12.2 Boards of NBFCs shall lay out appropriate internal principles and procedures in
determining interest rates and processing and other charges. In this regard, the guidelines
indicated in the Fair Practices Code about transparency in respect of terms and conditions
of the loans are to be kept in view.
45.13 Repossession of vehicles financed by NBFCs
45.13.1 NBFCs must have a built-in re-possession clause in the contract/loan agreement
with the borrower which must be legally enforceable. To ensure transparency, the terms
and conditions of the contract/loan agreement shall also contain provisions regarding:
(i) Notice period before taking possession;
(ii) Circumstances under which the notice period can be waived;
(iii) The procedure for taking possession of the security;
(iv) A provision regarding final chance to be given to the borrower for repayment of loan
before the sale/ auction of the property;
(v) The procedure for giving repossession to the borrower; and
(vi) The procedure for sale/auction of the property.
45.13.2 A copy of such terms and conditions must be made available to the borrower.
NBFCs shall invariably furnish a copy of the loan agreement along with a copy each of all
enclosures quoted in the loan agreement to all the borrowers at the time of sanction/
disbursement of loans, which forms a key component of such contracts/ loan agreements.
45.14 Lending against collateral of Gold Jewellery
While lending to individuals against collateral of gold jewellery, NBFCs shall adopt the
following in addition to the general guidelines as above.
45.14.1 They shall put in place Board approved policy for lending against gold that shall
inter alia, cover the following:
(i) Adequate steps to ensure that the KYC guidelines stipulated by the Reserve Bank are
complied with and to ensure that adequate due diligence is carried out on the customer
before extending any loan,
(ii) Proper assaying procedure for the jewellery received,
(iii) Internal systems to satisfy ownership of the gold jewellery,
(iv) Adequate systems for storing the jewellery in safe custody, reviewing the systems on
an on-going basis, training the concerned staff and periodic inspection by internal auditors
to ensure that the procedures are strictly adhered to. Normally, such loans shall not be
extended by branches that do not have appropriate facility for storage of the jewellery,
(v) The jewellery accepted as collateral shall be appropriately insured,
(vi) Transparent auction procedure in case of non-repayment with adequate prior notice
to the borrower. There shall be no conflict of interest and the auction process must ensure
that there is arm’s length relationship in all transactions during the auction including with
group companies and related entities,
(vii) The auction shall be announced to the public by issue of advertisements in at least
two newspapers, one in vernacular and another in national daily newspaper,
(viii) As a policy, the NBFCs themselves shall not participate in the auctions held,
(ix) Gold pledged shall be auctioned only through auctioneers approved by the Board,
(x) The policy shall also cover systems and procedures to be put in place for dealing with
fraud including separation of duties of mobilisation, execution and approval.
45.14.2 The loan agreement shall also disclose details regarding auction procedure.
45.14.3 Other Instructions
(i) NBFCs financing against the collateral of gold must insist on a copy of the PAN Card
of the borrower for all transaction above ₹5 lakh.
(ii) Documentation across all branches must be standardized.
(iii) NBFCs shall not issue misleading advertisements like claiming the availability of loans
in a matter of 2-3 minutes.
45.15 Loan facilities to the physically/visually challenged by NBFCs
NBFCs shall not discriminate in extending products and facilities including loan facilities
to physically/visually challenged applicants on grounds of disability. All branches of
NBFCs shall render all possible assistance to such persons for availing of the various
business facilities. NBFCs shall include a suitable module containing the rights of persons
with disabilities guaranteed to them by the law and international conventions, in all the
training programmes conducted for their employees at all levels. Further, NBFCs shall
ensure redressal of grievances of persons with disabilities under the Grievance Redressal
Mechanism already set up by them.

SOURCE: RBI (Digital Lending) Directions, 2025
भारतीय  रज़वर् बैंक
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
RBI/2025-26/36
DOR.STR.REC.19/21.07.001/2025-26 May 8, 2025
Reserve Bank of India (Digital Lending) Directions, 2025
Index
Chapter I: Preliminary................................................................................................... 3
1. Preamble .............................................................................................................. 3
2. Short title and commencement ............................................................................. 3
3. Applicability........................................................................................................... 4
4. Definitions............................................................................................................. 4
Chapter II: General Requirements for RE-LSP Arrangements .................................. 5
5. Due diligence requirements with respect to LSPs................................................. 5
6. RE-LSP arrangements involving multiple lenders ................................................. 6
Chapter III: Conduct and Customer Protection Requirements ................................. 7
7. Assessing the borrower’s creditworthiness........................................................... 7
8. Disclosures to borrowers ...................................................................................... 8
9. Loan disbursal, servicing and repayment ............................................................. 9
10. Cooling-off period ............................................................................................... 10
11. Grievance redressal............................................................................................ 10
Chapter IV: Technology and Data Requirement ....................................................... 11
12. Collection, usage and sharing of data with third parties...................................... 11
13. Storage of data ................................................................................................... 12
14. Comprehensive privacy policy ............................................................................ 13
15. Technology standards ........................................................................................ 13
Chapter V: Reporting of Credit Information and DLAs ............................................ 13
16. Reporting to Credit Information Companies (CICs) ............................................ 13
Withdrawn
2
17. Reporting of DLAs to RBI ................................................................................... 13
Chapter VI: Loss sharing arrangement in case of default....................................... 15
18. Eligibility as DLG provider................................................................................... 15
19. Due diligence and other requirements with respect to DLG provider.................. 15
20. Restrictions on entering into DLG arrangements................................................ 16
21. Structure of DLG arrangements.......................................................................... 16
22. Forms of DLG ..................................................................................................... 17
23. Cap on DLG........................................................................................................ 17
24. Recognition of NPA ............................................................................................ 17
25. Treatment of DLG for regulatory capital.............................................................. 18
26. Invocation and tenor of DLG............................................................................... 18
27. Disclosure requirements ..................................................................................... 18
28. Exceptions .......................................................................................................... 19
Chapter VII: General and Repeal Provisions ............................................................ 19
29. General provisions.............................................................................................. 19
30. Repeal provisions ............................................................................................... 20
Annex I: Data to be submitted on the CIMS portal ................................................... 21
Annex II: Illustrations.................................................................................................. 22
Annex III: List of circulars to be repealed with the issuance of these Directions
Withdrawn
 . 24
3
Chapter I: Preliminary
1. Preamble
Reserve Bank is statutorily mandated to operate the credit system of the country to its
advantage. In this endeavour, Reserve Bank encourages innovation in the financial
systems, products and credit delivery methods while ensuring orderly growth, financial
stability and protection of depositors’ and borrowers’ interest. Certain concerns had
emerged around the methods of designing, delivering and servicing digital credit
products, which if not mitigated, may impact the borrower’s confidence in the digital
lending ecosystem. The concerns primarily relate to unbridled engagement of third
parties, mis-selling, breach of data privacy, unfair business conduct, charging of
exorbitant interest rates, and unethical recovery practices. To address these
concerns, pursuant to the recommendations made by the “Working Group on Digital
Lending”, the Reserve Bank has, from time to time, issued guidelines to its regulated
entities on digital lending. These Directions consolidate the earlier instructions along
with certain new measures for arrangements involving Lending Service Providers
partnering with multiple regulated entities as mentioned under para 6, and for creation
of a directory of digital lending apps as mentioned under para 17 of these Directions.
Accordingly, in exercise of powers conferred by sections 21, 35A and 56 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, sections 45JA, 45L and 45M of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934, sections 30A and 32 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, section
6 of the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 and section 11 of the Credit Information
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, the Reserve Bank of India being satisfied that it is
necessary and expedient in the public interest to do so, hereby issues these Directions
hereinafter specified.
2. Short title and commencement
i. These Directions shall be called the Reserve Bank of India (Digital Lending)
Directions, 2025.
Withdrawn
4
ii. These Directions shall come into force immediately except for para 6, which shall
come into effect from November 1, 2025, and para 17, which shall come into effect
from June 15, 2025.
3. Applicability
These Directions shall be applicable to all digital lending activities of the following
entities, hereinafter referred to as a Regulated Entity (RE) and collectively as
Regulated Entities (REs), as the context may require:
i. All Commercial Banks,
ii. All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks, State Co-operative Banks, Central Cooperative Banks,
iii. All Non-Banking Financial Companies (including Housing Finance Companies),
and
iv. All All-India Financial Institutions.
4. Definitions
For the purpose of these Directions, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
herein shall bear the meaning assigned to them below:
i. Annual Percentage Rate (APR): APR as defined under Circular No.
DOR.STR.REC.13/13.03.00/2024-25 on ‘Key Facts Statement (KFS) for Loans &
Advances’ dated April 15, 2024, as amended from time to time.
ii. Default Loss Guarantee (DLG): A contractual arrangement, called by whatever
name, between the RE and another entity, under which the latter guarantees to
compensate the RE, for the loss due to default up to a certain percentage of the
loan portfolio of the RE, specified upfront. Any other implicit guarantee of similar
nature, linked to the performance of the loan portfolio of the RE and specified
upfront, shall also be covered under the definition of DLG.
Withdrawn
5
iii. Digital Lending: A remote and automated lending process, largely by use of
seamless digital technologies for customer acquisition, credit assessment, loan
approval, disbursement, recovery, and associated customer service.
iv. Digital Lending Apps/ Platforms (DLAs): Mobile and/or web-based applications,
on a standalone basis or as a part of suite of functions of an application with user
interface that facilitate digital lending services. DLAs shall include applications of
the RE as well as those operated by Lending Service Provider (LSP) engaged by
RE for extending any credit facilitation services in conformity with extant
outsourcing guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank.
v. Lending Service Provider (LSP): An agent of a RE (including another RE) who
carries out one or more of RE’s digital lending functions, or part thereof, in
customer acquisition, services incidental to underwriting and pricing, servicing,
monitoring, recovery of specific loan or loan portfolio on behalf of RE in conformity
with extant outsourcing guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank.
1
Chapter II: General Requirements for RE-LSP Arrangements
5. Due diligence requirements with respect to LSPs
i. Digital lending by a RE involving a LSP, shall be carried out under a contractual
agreement between the RE and the LSP, which clearly defines the respective
roles, rights, and obligations of each party thereto.
ii. RE shall conduct enhanced due diligence before they enter into an agreement with
a LSP for digital lending, taking into account LSP’s technical capabilities,
robustness of data privacy policies and storage systems, fairness in conduct with
borrowers, past records of conduct and ability to comply with all applicable
regulations and statutes.

1 While entities offering only Payment Aggregator (PA) services in terms of the extant instructions issued by RBI shall
remain out of the ambit of these Directions, any PA also performing the role of an LSP shall comply with these
Directions.
Withdrawn
6
iii. RE shall carry out periodic review of the conduct of the LSP vis-à-vis the terms of
the contractual agreement and shall take appropriate action in the event of any
deviation therefrom.
iv. RE shall lay down, as part of its policy, suitable monitoring mechanisms for the
loan portfolios originated with the support of LSPs.
v. RE shall impart necessary guidance to LSP acting as a recovery agent, to
discharge their duties responsibly and ensure that LSP complies with the
applicable instructions2 in this regard.
vi. RE shall continue to conform to the extant guidelines on outsourcing3 and shall
ensure that the LSPs engaged by them and the DLAs (either of the RE or of the
LSPs engaged by the RE) comply with these Directions.
vii. As an overarching principle, any outsourcing agreement entered into by the RE
with an LSP shall in no manner dilute or absolve the RE of its obligations under
any statutory or regulatory provision, and the RE shall remain fully responsible and
liable for all acts and omissions of the LSP.
6. RE-LSP arrangements involving multiple lenders
In cases where a LSP has agreements with multiple REs for digital lending, each RE
shall ensure the following:
i. LSP shall provide a digital view of all the loan offers matching the borrower’s
request on the DLA which meets the requirement of the borrower. The name of the
unmatched lenders shall also be disclosed in the digital view.

2 Circular DOR.ORG.REC.65/21.04.158/2022-23 on ‘Outsourcing of Financial Services - Responsibilities of regulated
entities employing Recovery Agents’ dated August 12, 2022, and other relevant instructions as issued from time to
time.
3 Para 2.6 of the Master Circular on “Loans and Advances – Statutory and Other restrictions” dated July 01, 2015;
Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in Outsourcing of Financial Services by Banks issued vide Circular
dated November 03, 2006 as amended from time to time; Para 48 of Master Direction – Reserve Bank of India (NonBanking Financial Company – Scale Based Regulation) Directions, 2023 dated October 19, 2023, as amended from
time to time; ‘Guidelines for Managing Risk in Outsourcing of Financial Services by Co-operative Banks’, dated June
28, 2021; Circular on ‘Outsourcing of Financial Services - Responsibilities of regulated entities employing Recovery
Agents’ dated August 12, 2022, and other related instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
Withdrawn
7
ii. While the LSP may adopt any mechanism to match the request of borrowers with
the lender (s) to offer a loan, it shall follow a consistent approach for similarly
placed borrowers and products. The mechanism adopted by the LSP and any
subsequent changes to this mechanism shall be properly documented.
iii. The digital view of loan offers from matching lenders shall include the name (s) of
the RE (s) extending the loan offer, amount and tenor of loan, APR, monthly
repayment obligation and penal charges (if applicable), in a way which enables the
borrower to make a fair comparison between various offers. A link to the KFS shall
also be provided in respect of each of the RE.
iv. The content displayed by the LSP shall be unbiased, objective and shall not
directly/ indirectly promote or push a product of a particular RE, including the use
of dark patterns/deceptive patterns4 designed to mislead borrowers into choosing
a particular loan offer. However, ranking of loan offers based on a publicly predisclosed metric for such ranking shall not be construed as promoting a particular
product.
Chapter III: Conduct and Customer Protection Requirements
7. Assessing the borrower’s creditworthiness
i. RE shall obtain the necessary information relating to economic profile of the
borrower with a view to assessing the borrower’s creditworthiness before
extending any loan, including, at a minimum, age, occupation and income details.
The same shall be kept on record for audit purposes.
ii. RE shall ensure that there is no automatic increase in credit limit unless an explicit
request is received, evaluated and kept on record from the borrower for such
increase.

4 As defined under section 2(e) of the ‘Guidelines for Prevention and Regulation of Dark Patterns, 2023’ dated
November 30, 2023, issued by Central Consumer Protection Authority, as amended from time to time.
Withdrawn
8
8. Disclosures to borrowers
i. RE shall provide a Key Fact Statement (KFS), as per instructions contained in
circular no. DOR.STR.REC.13/13.03.00/2024-25 on ‘Key Facts Statement (KFS)
for Loans & Advances’ dated April 15, 2024, as amended from time to time.
ii. As regards penal charges, RE shall be guided by circular no.
DoR.MCS.REC.28/01.01.001/2023-24 on ‘Fair Lending Practice - Penal Charges
in Loan Accounts’ dated August 18, 2023, as amended from time to time.
iii. RE shall ensure that digitally signed documents5 (on the letter head of the RE) viz.,
KFS, summary of loan product, sanction letter, terms and conditions, account
statements, privacy policies of the RE / LSP with respect to storage and usage of
borrowers’ data, etc. shall automatically flow to the borrower on the registered and
verified email/ SMS upon execution of the loan contract/ transactions.
iv. RE shall maintain a website of their own in public domain, which shall be kept up
to date, inter-alia, with the following details at a prominent single place on the
website for ease of accessibility:
a. Details of all of its digital lending products and its DLAs;
b. Details of LSPs and the DLAs of the LSPs along with the details of the
activities for which they have been engaged for;
c. Particulars of RE’s customer care and internal grievance redressal
mechanism;
d. Link to RBI’s Complaint Management System (CMS) and Sachet Portal;
e. Privacy policies and other details as required under extant guidelines of the
Reserve Bank.
RE shall ensure that DLAs / LSPs have links to the above website of the RE.

5 As per the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000, as amended from time to time.
Withdrawn
9
v. In case of a loan default, when a recovery agent is assigned for recovery or there
is a change in the recovery agent already assigned, the particulars of such
recovery agent authorised to approach the borrower for recovery shall be
communicated to the borrower through email/ SMS before the recovery agent
contacts the borrower for recovery.
9. Loan disbursal, servicing and repayment
i. Disbursement of loan by the RE shall always be made into the bank account of the
borrower except for disbursals covered exclusively under statutory or regulatory
mandate (of RBI or of any other regulator), flow of money between REs for colending transactions6 and disbursals for specific end use, provided the loan is
disbursed directly into the bank account of the end-beneficiary7. RE shall ensure
that in no case, disbursal is made to a third-party account, including the accounts
of LSP, except as provided for in these Directions.
ii. RE shall ensure that all loan servicing, repayment, etc. is executed by the borrower
directly in the RE’s bank account without any pass-through account/ pool account
of any third party, including the accounts of LSP.
iii. The flow of funds between the bank accounts of the borrower and the RE shall not
be controlled either directly or indirectly by a third-party, including the LSP.
iv. RE shall ensure that any fees, charges, reimbursements, etc. payable to LSP are
paid directly by the RE and are not charged to or collected from the borrowers
separately by LSP.

6 Co-lending arrangements shall be governed by the extant instructions, as amended from time to time. This shall also
cover co-lending arrangements between REs for non-PSL loans subject to the condition that no third party other than
the REs in a co-lending transaction shall have direct or indirect control over the flow of funds at any point of time. 7 Advances against salary, where the loan is disbursed directly to the bank account of the borrower but the repayment
is from the corporate employer, can be allowed subject to the condition that the loan is repaid by the corporate employer
by deducting the amount from the borrower’s salary. It must, however, be ensured that LSPs do not have any control
over the flow of funds directly or indirectly in such transactions and that repayment is directly from the bank account of
the employer to the RE.
Withdrawn
10
v. In case of delinquent loans, RE may deploy physical interface to recover loans in
cash, wherever necessary. In order to afford operational flexibility to RE, such
transactions are exempted from the requirement of direct repayment of loan in the
RE’s bank account. However, any recovery by cash shall be duly reflected in full
in the borrower’s account on the same day and RE shall ensure that any fees,
charges, etc., payable to LSPs for such recovery are paid directly by the RE and
are not charged by LSP to the borrower either directly or indirectly from the
recovery proceeds.
10.Cooling-off period
i. The borrower shall be given an explicit option to exit a digital loan by paying the
principal and the proportionate APR without any penalty during an initial “coolingoff period”. The cooling off period shall be determined by the Board of the RE as
laid down in their loan policy, subject to the period so determined not being less
than one day. For borrower continuing with the loan even after cooling-off period,
pre-payment shall continue to be allowed as per applicable RBI guidelines8.
ii. RE may retain a reasonable one-time processing fee, if the customer exits the loan
during the cooling-off period. This, if applicable, shall be disclosed to the customer
upfront in KFS.
11.Grievance redressal
i. The RE, and the LSP which has an interface with the borrower, shall designate
nodal grievance redressal officers to deal with digital lending related complaints/
issues raised by the borrower.

8 In terms of Circular DBR.Dir.BC.No.08/13.03.00/2019-20 “Levy of Foreclosure Charges /Pre-payment Penalty on
Floating Rate Term Loans” dated August 02, 2019 for banks and Master Direction – Reserve Bank of India (NonBanking Financial Company – Scale Based Regulation) Directions, 2023 dated October 19, 2023 for NBFCs, as
amended from time to time, and other relevant instructions as issued from time to time.
Withdrawn
11
ii. Contact details of the nodal grievance redressal officers shall be prominently
displayed on the websites of the RE, its LSP and on the DLA, as well as in the KFS
provided to the borrower.
iii. The facility of lodging complaint shall also be made available on the DLA and on
the website as stated above. It is reiterated that responsibility of grievance
redressal shall continue to remain with the RE.
iv. If any complaint lodged by the borrower against the RE or the LSP engaged by the
RE is rejected wholly or partly by the RE, or the borrower is not satisfied with the
reply; or the borrower has not received any reply within 30 days of receipt of
complaint by the RE, the said borrower can lodge a complaint over the Complaint
Management System (CMS)9 portal under the Reserve Bank-Integrated
Ombudsman Scheme (RB-IOS)10 or send a physical complaint to “Centralised
Receipt and Processing Centre, 4th Floor, Reserve Bank of India, Sector-17,
Central Vista, Chandigarh - 160017” as per the grievance redressal mechanism
prescribed by the Reserve Bank. This information shall be suitably conveyed to
the borrower.
Chapter IV: Technology and Data Requirement
12.Collection, usage and sharing of data with third parties
i. RE shall ensure that any collection of data by their DLA and DLA of their LSP is
need-based and with prior and explicit consent of the borrower having audit trail.
In any case, RE shall also ensure that DLA of RE/LSP desist from accessing
mobile phone resources like file and media, contact list, call logs, telephony
functions, etc. A one-time access can be taken for camera, microphone, location
or any other facility necessary for the purpose of on-boarding/ KYC requirements
only, with the explicit consent of the borrower.

9 https://cms.rbi.org.in/ 10 Issued vide Notification CEPD. PRD. No.S873/13.01.001/2021-22 dated November 12, 2021
Withdrawn
12
ii. The borrower shall be provided with an option to give or deny consent for use of
specific data, restrict disclosure to third parties, data retention, revoke consent
already granted to collect personal data and if required, make the RE/LSP delete/
forget the data.
iii. The purpose of obtaining borrowers’ consent needs to be disclosed at each stage
of interface with the borrowers.
iv. Explicit consent of the borrower shall be taken before sharing personal information
with any third party, except for cases where such sharing is required as per
statutory or regulatory requirement.
13.Storage of data
i. RE shall ensure that LSP engaged by them do not store personal information of
borrower except some basic minimal data (viz., name, address, contact details of
the customer, etc.) that may be required to carry out their operations or service
within the scope of the RE-LSP agreement. Responsibility regarding data privacy
and security of the customer’s personal information on an ongoing basis shall be
that of the RE.
ii. RE shall ensure that clear policy guidelines regarding the storage of customer data
including the type of data that can be stored, the length of time for which data can
be stored, restrictions on the use of data, data destruction protocol, standards for
handling security breach, etc., are put in place and also disclosed by the RE and
the LSP engaged by the RE prominently on their website and DLA at all times.
iii. RE shall ensure that no biometric data is stored/ collected by the RE and LSP,
unless allowed under extant statutory guidelines.
iv. RE shall ensure that all data is stored only in servers located within India, while
ensuring compliance with statutory obligations/ regulatory instructions. Further, in
case the data is processed outside India, the same shall be deleted from servers
outside India and brought back to India within 24 hours of processing.
Withdrawn
13
14.Comprehensive privacy policy
i. RE and LSPs engaged by RE shall have a comprehensive privacy policy compliant
with applicable laws, associated regulations and RBI guidelines which shall be
made available publicly on the website of RE and LSP, as the case may be.
ii. Details of third parties (where applicable) allowed to collect personal information
through the DLA shall also be disclosed in the privacy policy.
15.Technology standards
i. RE shall ensure that they and the LSPs engaged by them comply with various
technology standards/ requirements on cybersecurity stipulated by RBI and other
relevant agencies, or as may be specified from time to time, for undertaking digital
lending.
Chapter V: Reporting of Credit Information and DLAs
16.Reporting to Credit Information Companies (CICs)
i. As per the provisions of the Credit Information Companies (CIC) (Regulation) Act,
2005; CIC Rules, 2006; CIC Regulations, 2006 and related guidelines issued by
RBI from time to time, RE shall ensure that any lending done through their DLAs
and/ or DLAs of LSPs is reported by them to CICs irrespective of its nature/ tenor.
ii. Extension of structured digital lending products by RE and/or LSPs engaged by
RE over a merchant platform involving short term, unsecured/ secured credits or
deferred payments, need to be reported to CICs by the RE. RE shall ensure that
LSPs, if any, associated with such deferred payment credit products shall abide by
the extant outsourcing guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank and be guided by
these Directions.
17.Reporting of DLAs to RBI
i. RE shall report all DLAs deployed/ joined by them, whether their own or those of
the LSPs, either exclusively or as a platform participant, on the Centralised
Withdrawn
14
Information Management System (CIMS) portal of RBI in the requisite format as
given in the Annex-I to these Directions.
ii. RE shall update the aforesaid list as and when additional DLA (s) are deployed or
the engagement with the existing DLA (s) ceases to exist by filing the updated data
in the CIMS portal.
iii. The Chief Compliance Officer of the RE or any other official designated by the
Board of the RE for the purpose shall certify that the data on DLAs submitted by
them on the CIMS portal is correct and the DLAs are compliant with all the extant
regulatory instructions, including the provisions of these Directions, as updated
from time to time.
iv. Without prejudice to the generality of the above, the Chief Compliance Officer/
other official designated by the Board of the RE shall certify the following aspects:
a. DLAs have link to RE’s website where further information about the loan
products, the lender, the LSP, particulars of customer care, link to Sachet
Portal, privacy policies, etc. can be accessed by the borrower.
b. DLAs (in case owned by LSP), have appointed a suitable nodal grievance
redressal officer to deal with digital lending related complaints/ issues raised
by the borrower, details of which are prominently available on the respective
DLA.
c. Data collection and storage by DLAs is in compliance with para 12 and 13
of these Directions and other statutory and regulatory requirements, as
applicable from time to time.
d. The DLA’s particulars submitted by the RE are also suitably disclosed on
the RE’s website as required under para 8(iv) of these Directions.
v. RE shall ensure the correctness and timeliness of information regarding DLAs, as
the data, as submitted by the RE on CIMS, shall be published on the website of
RBI in an automated manner and RBI shall not verify/ validate the data submitted
Withdrawn
15
on CIMS. All issues and grievances of customers concerning DLAs shall be
addressed and dealt with by the RE directly.
vi. RE shall ensure that the inclusion of any third party DLAs deployed by them as
part of above reporting, shall not be construed by the DLAs or any associated entity
as conferring any form of registration, authorization, or endorsement by the
Reserve Bank. RE shall also ensure that such inclusion is not misrepresented in
any marketing, promotional, or other materials issued by or on behalf of the DLAs.
vii. RE shall ensure that the reporting in respect of all DLAs on the CIMS portal is
completed by June 15, 2025.
Chapter VI: Loss sharing arrangement in case of default
18.Eligibility as DLG provider
i. RE may enter into DLG arrangements only with a LSP/ other RE engaged as a
LSP. Further, the LSP providing DLG shall be incorporated as a company under
the Companies Act, 2013.
19.Due diligence and other requirements with respect to DLG provider
i. RE, including a RE acting as DLG provider, shall put in place a Board approved
policy before entering into any DLG arrangement. Such policy shall include, at a
minimum, the eligibility criteria for DLG provider, nature and extent of DLG cover,
process of monitoring and reviewing the DLG arrangement, and the details of the
fees, if any, payable to/ received by the DLG provider, as the case may be.
ii. RE shall ensure that any DLG arrangement does not act as a substitute for credit
appraisal requirements and robust credit underwriting standards need to be put in
place irrespective of the DLG cover.
iii. Every time a RE enters into or renews a DLG arrangement, it shall obtain adequate
information to satisfy itself that the entity extending DLG would be able to honour
it. Such information shall, at a minimum, include a declaration from the DLG
Withdrawn
16
provider, certified by the statutory auditor of the DLG provider, on the aggregate
DLG amount outstanding, the number of RE and the respective number of
portfolios against which DLG has been provided. The declaration shall also contain
past default rates on similar portfolios.
iv. It is clarified that the due-diligence requirements specified herein are in addition to
the general requirements applicable to RE-LSP arrangements as set out in para 5
of these Directions.
20.Restrictions on entering into DLG arrangements
i. RE shall not enter into DLG arrangements for revolving credit facilities offered
through digital lending channel and credit cards as defined under Master Direction
– Credit Card and Debit Card – Issuance and Conduct Directions, 2022 dated April
21, 2022.
ii. RE shall not enter into DLG arrangements on the loans which are covered by the
credit guarantee schemes administered by trust funds as specified under para 2
of Review of Prudential Norms – Risk Weights for Exposures guaranteed by Credit
Guarantee Schemes (CGS) dated September 07, 2022, as amended from time to
time.
iii. NBFC – P2P shall not enter into DLG arrangements for the loans facilitated over
its platform and be guided by para 6(1)(iv) of Master Direction - Non-Banking
Financial Company – Peer to Peer Lending Platform (Reserve Bank) Directions,
2017 dated October 04, 2017, as amended from time to time.
21.Structure of DLG arrangements
i. DLG arrangements shall be backed by an explicit and legally enforceable contract
between the RE and the DLG provider. Such contract, among other things, shall
contain the following details:
a. Extent of DLG cover;
b. Form in which DLG cover is to be maintained with the RE;
Withdrawn
17
c. Timeline for DLG invocation;
d. Disclosure requirements as under para 27 of these Directions.
22.Forms of DLG
i. RE shall accept DLG only in one or more of the following forms:
a. Cash deposited with the RE;
b. Fixed Deposit maintained with a Scheduled Commercial Bank with a lien
marked in favour of the RE;
c. Bank Guarantee in favour of the RE.
23.Cap on DLG
i. RE shall ensure that the total amount of DLG cover on any outstanding portfolio
which is specified upfront shall not exceed five per cent of the total amount
disbursed out of that loan portfolio at any given time. In case of implicit guarantee
arrangements, the DLG Provider shall not bear performance risk of more than the
equivalent amount of five per cent of the underlying loan portfolio.
ii. The portfolio over which DLG can be offered shall consist of identifiable and
measurable loan assets which have been sanctioned (the ‘DLG set’). This portfolio
shall remain fixed for the purpose of DLG cover and is not meant to be dynamic.
Refer to Illustrations given in Annex – II.
24.Recognition of NPA
i. Recognition of individual loan assets in the portfolio as Non-Performing Asset
(NPA) and consequent provisioning shall be the responsibility of the RE as per the
extant asset classification and provisioning norms irrespective of any DLG cover
available at the portfolio level.
ii. The amount of DLG invoked shall not be set off against the underlying individual
loans, i.e. the liability of the borrowers in respect of the underlying loan shall remain
unaffected.
Withdrawn
18
iii. Recovery by the RE, if any, from the loans on which DLG has been invoked and
realised, can be shared with the DLG provider in terms of the contractual
arrangement.
iv. DLG amount once invoked by the RE shall not be reinstated, including through
loan recovery.
25.Treatment of DLG for regulatory capital
i. Capital computation, i.e., computation of exposure and application of Credit Risk
Mitigation benefits on individual loan assets in the portfolio shall continue to be
governed by the extant norms11.
ii. In case, DLG provider is an RE, it shall deduct full amount of the DLG which is
outstanding from its capital.
26.Invocation and tenor of DLG
i. RE shall invoke DLG within a maximum overdue period of 120 days, unless the
loan dues are made good by the borrower before that.
ii. The period for which the DLG agreement remains in force shall not be less than
the longest tenor of the loan in the underlying loan portfolio.
27.Disclosure requirements
i. RE shall put in place a mechanism to ensure that LSPs with whom they have a
DLG arrangement shall publish on their website the total number of portfolios and
the respective amount of each portfolio on which DLG has been offered. The name
of the RE may or may not be disclosed as part of disclosure under this provision.

11 Para 7 of the ‘Master Circular on Basel III Capital Regulations’ dated April 01, 2025, as amended from time to time,
Master Direction – Reserve Bank of India (Non-Banking Financial Company – Scale Based Regulation) Directions,
2023 dated October 19, 2023 (as updated from time to time), Master Circular on ‘Prudential Norms on Capital Adequacy
- Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks (UCBs)’ dated April 01, 2025 as amended from time to time, Circular on
‘Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks’ dated October 06, 2016 and Master Direction - Reserve Bank of India
(Prudential Regulations on Basel III Capital Framework, Exposure Norms, Significant Investments, Classification,
Valuation and Operation of Investment Portfolio Norms and Resource Raising Norms for All India Financial Institutions)
Directions, 2023 dated September 21, 2023 (as amended from time to time).
Withdrawn
19
ii. Disclosure under para (i) above shall be made on a monthly basis, with the
disclosure for any given month to be provided no later than seven (7) working days
following the conclusion of that month.
28.Exceptions
Guarantees covered under the following schemes/ entities shall not be covered within
the definition of DLG:
i. Guarantee schemes of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small
Enterprises (CGTMSE), Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income
Housing (CRGFTLIH) and individual schemes under National Credit Guarantee
Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC).
ii. Credit guarantee provided by Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
International Monetary Fund (IMF) as well as Multilateral Development Banks as
referred to in para 5.5 of RBI Master Circular on Basel III Capital Regulation dated
April 01, 2025, as amended from time to time.
Chapter VII: General and Repeal Provisions
29.General provisions
i. EMI programmes on Credit Card are governed specifically by Para 6(b)(iii)12 of the
Master Direction on Credit Card and Debit Card – Issuance and Conduct, 2022
dated April 21, 2022. Such transactions shall not be covered under these
Directions. However other loan products offered on Credit Cards which are not
covered/ envisaged under the aforesaid para of the Master Direction shall be
governed by the stipulations laid down under these Directions. Further, these
Directions shall also be applicable to all loans offered on Debit Card, including EMI
programmes.

12 Card-issuers shall ensure complete transparency in the conversion of credit card transactions to Equated Monthly
Instalments (EMIs) by clearly indicating the principal, interest and upfront discount provided by the merchant/cardissuer (to make it no cost), prior to the conversion. The same shall also be separately indicated in the credit card
bill/statement. EMI conversion with interest component shall not be camouflaged as zero-interest/no-cost EMI.
Withdrawn
20
ii. DLG arrangements entered between RE and LSP conforming to the instructions
laid down in Chapter VI of these Directions shall not be treated as synthetic
securitisation as defined under para 6(c) of Master Direction – Reserve Bank of
India (Securitisation of Standard Assets) Directions, 2021 dated September 24,
2021 and shall also not attract the provisions of ‘loan participation’ as defined
under Para 9(e) of the Reserve Bank of India (Transfer of Loan Exposures)
Directions, 2021 dated September 24, 2021.
iii. These Directions are without prejudice to any other extant regulatory norms or
statutory provisions as applicable to the RE's activities, from time to time.
30.Repeal provisions
i. With the issuance of these Directions, the instructions/guidelines contained in the
circulars mentioned in the Annex - III issued by RBI stand repealed.
ii. Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-para (i), anything done or any action taken
or purported to have been done or taken, or any direction given or any proceeding
taken or any penalty or fine imposed under the repealed enactments shall, insofar
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of these Directions, be deemed to have
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
Withdrawn
these Directions.
Annex I: Data to be submitted on the CIMS portal
Sl.
No.
Name of the
DLA
Name of the
owner of DLA
(Self-owned/
name of LSP
in case DLA
is of LSP)
Available on
(Website/
Name of
app store)
Link to DLA#
Name of
Grievance
Redressal
Officer
Email id
of
Grievance
Redressal
Officer
Telephone
number of
Grievance
Redressal
Officer
Mobile
number of
Grievance
Redressal
Officer
Website
of RE
*Each DLA to be reported as a separate line item. In case any DLA is available on multiple app stores, each entry is required to be reported
separately with specific links to the DLA on the app store
# In case DLA is a website, provide link to the website, or in case DLA is an app hosted on one of the app-stores, provide the link of the DLA on
the app-store
Withdrawn
Annex II: Illustrations
Note: Illustrations are provided for ease of understanding and are merely indicative and
not exhaustive.
Illustration 1
Assume that as on April 1, 2024 the RE earmarks a portfolio of ₹40 crore (out of the total
sanctioned loans) under a DLG arrangement (DLG set). This portfolio shall remain
"frozen" for the purpose of the specific DLG arrangement - meaning that no loan assets
can be added or removed from it, except through loan repayment/ write-off. The RE can
have such multiple DLG sets.
The ceiling for DLG cover on such portfolio shall be fixed at ₹2 crore (5% of ₹40 crore),
which shall get activated proportionately as and when the loans are disbursed.
Illustration 2
Assume that out of the above DLG set, loans amounting to ₹10 crore are disbursed
immediately. Then as on April 1, 2024, the DLG cover available for the portfolio shall be
₹0.5 crore (5% of disbursed).
Subsequently, if loans of ₹10 crore are further disbursed on April 15, 2024, the DLG cover
shall proportionately increase to ₹1 crore effective April 15, 2024.
(Refer table below also for summary of each case)
Case 1: As on June 30, 2024, loans worth ₹5 crore mature without any default. In this
case, the outstanding portfolio in the books of the RE would be ₹15 crore and the DLG
cover shall remain at ₹1 crore.
Case 2: Subsequently, there is a default of ₹2 crore during Q2-2024 and consequently
the RE invokes the entire DLG (₹1 crore13). In this case, as of Sept 30, 2024 the
outstanding portfolio in the books of the RE shall be ₹15 crore (₹20 crore original portfolio
less ₹5 crore loans matured without default) but no headroom for DLG will be available

13 It has been assumed that till date zero principal/interest have been received towards these loans.
Withdrawn
23
as the maximum permissible DLG cover of ₹1 crore (5% of disbursed) has been
exhausted.
Case 3: Going further, let’s assume that recovery worth ₹1 crore is made by the RE during
October 2024 on the defaulted loans of ₹2 crore. In such a case, the amount of the
outstanding portfolio in the books of the RE as on October 31, 2024 shall come down to
₹14 crore (₹20 crore original portfolio less ₹5 crore loans matured without any default less
₹1 crore loans which were in default and recovered). However, the recovery amount of
₹1 crore cannot be added to reinstate the DLG cover.
(figures in ₹ crore)
Period Disbu
rsed
Loan
maturing
without
default
Default
Amount
DLG
Invoked
Recovery
/ Write-off
Outstanding
Portfolio
Available
DLG
Cover
Initial Position 10 - - - - 10 0.5
Further
disbursement
10 - - - - 20 1
Case 1 20 5 - - - 15 1
Case 2 20 5 2 1 - 15 0
Case 3 20 5 2 1 1 14 0
Withdrawn
24
Annex III: List of circulars to be repealed with the issuance of these Directions
S.No. Circular No. Date Subject
1. RBI/2019-20/258
DOR(NBFC)(PD)
CC.No.112/03.10.001/2019-20
24.06.2020 Loans Sourced by Banks and
NBFCs over Digital Lending
Platforms: Adherence to Fair
Practices Code and
Outsourcing Guidelines
2. RBI/2022-23/111
DOR.CRE.REC
.66/21.07.001/2022-23
02.09.2022 Guidelines on Digital Lending
3. RBI/2023-24/41
DOR.CRE.REC
.21/21.07.001/2023-24
08.06.2023 Guidelines on Default Loss
Guarantee (DLG) in Digital
Lending
Withdrawn
